

Delft, the 2nd of August 1701.

Very Noble Sirs,

My last most humble letter to you, Your Honours, was that of the 21st of June last 1, in which I deal with what I have observed on the spider. Since then I received the undeserved presents, both the book dealing with fishes 2 and the Transactions of the year 1700. I am highly grateful for that generous presentation.
Legacy.I have a very small black-lacquer and gilt cabinet which contains five small drawers, in which are locked 13 long four-sided tin boxes which I have covered with black leather, and in each of those boxes there are two ground magnifying glasses, thus making 26 magnifying glasses, all of which have been ground by me and are in a silver setting and mounted with silver, most of them with the silver I extracted from mineral and separated from the gold with which it was contaminated; and a note is added about the object standing before each glass.
I have ordered my only daughter that after my death this cabinet with the said magnifying glasses, which I will use, shall be sent to you, Your Honours, as a token of my gratitude for the marks of honour I have received from you 3.
Circulation of the blood.A certain gentleman and friend, who visited me, told me among other things that Mr...., when showing him the circulation of the blood, had said that he could see not only the circulation of the blood, but could also see different saps circulating in the vessels.
I objected to this: how could one tell that different saps were conducted through the vessels?
I received the answer that the gentleman who showed these things could distinguish the different saps in the vessels by the colours of the saps in the vessels.


I informed my friend and visitor that what he, the person who showed it to him, took to be different saps in the vessels was one and the same blood and that the difference of the colour depended only on the thinness and thickness of the blood-vessels, for while the blood in the thinnest vessels, so to say, has little or no colour, the blood takes on more colour according as the vessels are wider, until in reasonably wide vessels it has a red colour 4.
With this statement of mine my friend was satisfied and he admitted the errors of N:....
Young eels.On this occasion I cannot help telling you, Your Honours, that last year I kept alive, for as many as three months, small eels, the largest of which were no more than the length of a finger.
These little eels were in a big, flat-bottomed, earthen, glazed jar and were placed in my cellar, which is very cool, and the water was renewed at least once a week.
When in the late summer some gentlemen came to see me and requested to see the circulation of the blood, I caused some of the said little eels to be brought to me; when I looked at them, at first I could not detect the circulation of the blood, which appeared strange to me, the more so because the little eels were swimming so nimbly as if they had just been caught. At last I detected now and then a few globules of blood in the thinnest blood-vessels; and so I could not show the gentlemen the circulation of the blood 5.
When I was alone, I examined the said little eels several times, with the same result.

But when I glanced at the largest blood-vessels I could discover, I saw that the blood was circulating at the usual rate, because the globules in the large vessels became visible to me in larger numbers, but not by any means as many as one hundredth of the number that would have been visible if the little eels had just been caught, from which I concluded that, for lack of food, most of the blood globules had been converted into food for the body 6. I caused the little eels to be thrown into the water because they were no longer any use to me and in order that they might be able to get food.
About 24 days ago I again caused such small eels to be caught, and ordered that they were to be dealt with as had been done last year, in order to see whether the globules of blood would also pass into the body.
This finding of mine is contrary to the following assertion.
A certain Gentleman, who came to me a few days ago, asked me whether he might see the circulation of the blood, which I permitted him. He told me, among other things, that a certain teacher asserted positively that the [number of] globules of blood, even if it is that of a child, did not decrease or increase until a great age.
In my view this was an objectionable assertion. I then objected that this was not at all in accordance with my ideas and the aforesaid observation about the blood in the little eels. I will conclude, and meanwhile remain 7,

Very Noble Sirs,
your obedient and obliged servant Antoni van Leeuwenhoek.

Very Noble Sir, 1

Level.Since my stay with you, when a certain fall of water was to be measured 2, I have frequently thought of this matter, the more so because, when the telescope which was mounted horizontally, by means of which the fall of the water was to be measured, was turned upside-down, in order to make a test on the staff set up, we observed a small difference.
The telescope used for this purpose consisted of two convex lenses; it is called a moon glass, through which the objects are seen upside-down 3.
Since in such a telescope the thin silk thread by means of which a distant horizontal height is measured must be at the focus of the eye-piece, this thread is very close to the eye.
It seems to me, by your leave, that if one used for this a telescope of about the same length which was made of four lenses, the silk thread by means of which one tries to measure a distant horizontal height would come to be almost five times as far from the eye as that of the telescope made of two lenses 4.
This being so, the very slight movement which is imparted to the telescope, however motionless one tries to place it, that one will see on the staff would be five times smaller with 4 lenses than with 2 lenses 5.


It is indisputable that, if one tries to measure a height above the horizon, the longer the horizontal line by means of which the measurement is to be made, the more perfectly the measurement can be performed. Let us now suppose that the focal length of the eye-piece of a telescope with 2 lenses is 2½ inches 6, then the horizontal distance between the silk thread and our eye by means of which the measurement must be made is only 2½ inches, while on the other hand, if the telescope were composed of four lenses, and those ground with one and the same diameter, the silk thread could be placed at a distance of 12½ inches from the eye, and consequently we should then have a level of 12½ inches, whilst the level of the first telescope is 2½ inches.
In order to place such a telescope of four lenses as last mentioned as horizontal as possible, so that a normal wind cannot affect the telescope, I should, by your leave, draw on the copper tube in which the lenses of the telescope are mounted a horizontal line on either side of it.
After having done this, I should take a glass tube 3 to 4 feet 7 long and ¾ inches wide or thereabouts.
After this tube had been sealed at one end, I should half fill it with brandy having a red colour, and having stoppered the open end, I should place it on a wooden lath made for that purpose.
When this tube, after the open end has been stoppered with a cork, is put down in such a way that it is almost level, the water or brandy in the glass tube will forthwith register the true level 8.
When this has been done, the telescope, with the horizontal line drawn thereon, can be placed beside the horizontal water in the tube, and thus a horizontal height can be measured with little trouble.
In order to find out more about this, I took my longest glass tube, which had a length of nearly 20 inches, and prepared it for use.

Since I was now convinced that the longer the tool, the more accurately one could perform the measurement of the difference, of a fall of water or height,
I then caused a glass tube to be blown which had a length of nearly 3½ feet, on which I mounted my auxiliary tools which I had put on the tube of 20 inches. In order to show you, Noble Sir, the said tool, I asked the draughtsman to draw it.
fig. I.The wooden lath, which is nearly as thick as it is broad, is denoted by ABCDEF, by Q and R is denoted a semi-circular hollow, in which is placed the glass tube, so close to the edge of the lath that on the side of the lath the glass tube projects a short distance beyond the lath.
IK represents the glass tube, which has been sealed at I, at which end is placed a piece of cork which lies close against the tube, and in order to give some firmness to the cork and the tube, by means of a copper screw which has been screwed into the wood, the tube is clenched in such a way that it cannot sag to Q.
By K is denoted the open end of the glass tube into which the brandy has been poured and which has been stoppered there with a cork and also screwed into the wood with a screw.
By C and D are denoted two screws which pass through copper plates into the wood, in order thus to fix the glass tube immovably on the wood.
After having done this, I screwed thereon, by means of screws in the wood, two sights, viz. HM and GL, to which at G and H can be imparted by suspended tubes 9 any movement that may be desired.
If one now places this tool on a table or board about 4 to 5 feet high, in such a way that the basis of the lath AHGF is nearly level, which will appear at once from the water in the glass tube, for then it will be almost halfway up the glass tube, one can put the sights M and L with their top, as much as possible and the eye permits, at the level of the water in the glass tube, which water is the true level, even if the glass tube is curved, bent, or thicker at one end than at the other.
When I had now placed my eye at O in order to observe, looking across the sight L at the top of the sight M, and at the same time saw as it were in one line a mounted staff, because of the multiplicity of the rays about the eye, the sight L appeared not sharp but blurred; I therefore decided to prevent this.

To this end I took a small copper plate and made a hollow in it, and in the centre of the hollow a hole, the width of a thick pin, and fixed it to a copper peg, and placed the latter in a device in which it could be moved in any useful direction.
I now placed my eye before the hollow and moved the device O until I saw through the hole O the sights L and M in a straight line, in which process the sight L showed itself very sharp to me.
When one now has observed the staff at a distance through OL and M, one may leave the position of the device unchanged, with the only difference that one turns O down, to the position of N, and turns N up somewhat, to the position of O. When one has done this, one can look back again through N via M and L, and can thus measure two distances.
After this has been done, wishing to test whether the measurement had been correct, I wanted to reverse the level, to wit, to place AB where EF lies, and EF where AB lies, and make the same observations as previously; and since I did not find any difference, we can be certain that the operation has been performed correctly.
Now I caused the wooden lath BCDE to be made somewhat shorter than its basis AHGF, in order that during its displacement or erection the devices N and O should not be hindered by the two projecting wooden parts.
When I put the said tool down, I always see to it that the end AB shall be at a lower level, in order that the brandy in the glass tube shall not reach the cork and will thus be prevented from oozing out.
One might have placed the sights HM and GL further towards the ends of the glass tube, but since the water always rises somewhat towards the ends of the glass tube, one would not thus get the true level, and in order to prevent this, and to obtain the true level or horizontal line, the sights have not been placed so close to the ends of the glass tube.

Level by Gallois.A certain gentleman, wishing to see the aforesaid tool, brought me the next dayfig. II. the Journal des Scavans of the year 1666, of the month of November, in which a certain author shows a glass tube for measuring the level and the height, as represented there in Fig. A 10. This glass tube is very short and filled with brandy, so that there is only a little air in it, by means of which air, if the glass is placed in such a way that the air remains at the top and in the middle of the glass tube, the bottom of the glass tube will denote the level.
In my opinion this tool cannot thus denote the true level, for since it is certain that a glass-blower cannot with certainty blow a glass tube in such a way that it keeps everywhere the same diameter, as is shown on this illustrated glass tube, which is thicker between 1 and 2, viz. between 3 and 4, it must follow that with the bottom of such a glass tube one cannot measure a horizontal height, but on the contrary a great difference will be caused 11. Now if from the top of such a glass tube one wanted to measure a horizontal distance, I also consider that this cannot be done with any certainty, because even if a glass-blower were able to blow a glass tube having the same diameter throughout, still it is impossible for him to make the glass itself of the same thickness throughout (as to this I have experience of many glass tubes which I ordered to be blown for many years past both at Liège and at Bois-le-Duc, to enable me to make my observations).
Now if the glass itself is not very accurately of the same thickness throughout and the air bubble remains in the middle, the top of the glass tube cannot be horizontal, because at the end where the glass is thickest the glass tube will be higher than at the other end.
I will conclude, and remain meanwhile, etc. 12

A. van Leeuwenhoek.
